
CODEX COLLABORATION TUTORIAL
Building Interactive E-Learning Content with AI
A Generic Workflow for SCORM Packaging, Web Deployment,
and Iterative Instructional Design

Document type
Technical tutorial / workflow guide
Primary scope
Interactive e-learning, SCORM, web deployment
Audience
Instructional designers, learning engineers, educators
Version date
April 17, 2026


TABLE OF CONTENTS




[Heading2] 1. What This Tutorial Is For
Use this guide when you want to work with Codex to create learning content that is:
interactive
instructional
testable
revisable
deployable either in an LMS or on the web
This tutorial focuses on the whole process, including:
defining the learning problem
specifying the interaction model
writing good prompts
reviewing intermediate results
refining the design and behavior
packaging for SCORM if needed
creating a separate web deployment version if needed
testing inside Moodle or another LMS
This is not only a coding guide.
It is a collaboration guide.
[Heading3] Primary Audience and Assumed Skill Level
This tutorial is written primarily for instructional designers, learning designers, learning engineers, and technically curious educators who want to collaborate with Codex to build working digital learning objects. A secondary audience is front-end developers or educational software collaborators who need a clearer view of the instructional logic behind the build requests.
That means the document is not written only for professional developers, but it is also not written as a zero-technical-literacy guide. It assumes the reader can work with files, understand the difference between a web version and a SCORM package, and review outputs in a browser or LMS. Where the workflow becomes more technical, such as SCORM packaging or runtime state handling, the document tries to explain the reason for each step rather than only naming the step itself.
If the reader is a classroom instructor or subject-matter expert with little implementation experience, the document can still be useful, but that reader may need developer support for the packaging and testing stages. If the reader is an experienced developer, the instructional-design framing may be the more valuable part.
[Heading3] Minimum Prerequisite Concepts Before Continuing
Some readers, especially undergraduate instructional-design students, may encounter several terms in this document for the first time. If that is the case, it is better to pause here and establish a small conceptual foundation rather than pushing forward and losing the thread by Section 5.
At minimum, a reader should understand the following ideas:
LMS: a learning management system such as Moodle, Canvas, or Blackboard, where learning content is launched, tracked, and sometimes graded
SCORM: a packaging and runtime standard that allows an LMS to launch a learning object and record basic state such as completion, score, and resume information
SCORM package: a zip file containing a manifest plus the files needed to launch the activity
imsmanifest.xml: the file that tells the LMS what the package contains and which file to launch
SCO: a shareable content object, often the launchable unit inside a SCORM package
suspend_data: resumable learner state stored by the SCORM runtime
web version: a browser-deployable version that runs outside the LMS
localStorage: browser-side persistence commonly used in a non-SCORM web version
Git: a version-control system that makes code changes, branching, diffing, and rollback much easier to manage
The quickest way to explain the difference between a web object and a SCORM object is this: the learning interaction can be almost identical, but the SCORM version is wrapped for LMS launch, state, and reporting, while the web version is wrapped for ordinary browser deployment. If that distinction is clear, the rest of the tutorial becomes much easier to follow.
[Heading3] Fast Orientation Glossary
This mini-glossary is intentionally brief. It is not meant to replace formal standards documentation, but it should help beginners stay oriented.
Articulate : A popular commercial authoring platform used to build e-learning courses, especially slide-based and interaction-rich courseware for LMS delivery.
Canvas : An LMS often used in higher education and K-12 settings.
cmi5 : A specification that builds on xAPI and adds a more structured LMS launch-and-assignment model.
Codex : The coding collaborator used in this workflow to help author, refine, package, and document learning objects.
D3 : A JavaScript library commonly used for data-driven visualizations.
manifest : In SCORM, this usually refers to imsmanifest.xml, which describes package structure and launch information.
Moodle : The primary LMS sandbox used in this tutorial for local SCORM testing.
resume : The ability for a learner to leave and later return to the same activity state.
SCORM Cloud : A neutral environment often used to help distinguish package-level issues from LMS-specific issues.
Three.js : A JavaScript library used for browser-based 3D graphics. It is only one optional rendering layer, not a requirement for this tutorial.
xAPI : A specification for recording richer learning-experience events than SCORM typically handles comfortably.
[Heading3] Suggested Teaching Sequence for Courses or Workshops
This document is long enough that it should not be treated as a single reading block in most teaching contexts. A better approach is to modularize it by instructional stage.
One practical teaching sequence is:
Module 1: Orientation and framing : Sections 1-4. Use this for students who need the basic language of LMS delivery, web delivery, sandbox logic, and the difference between interaction design and packaging.
Module 2: Prompt architecture : Section 5 and Section 7. This is the conceptual center of the document and should often be taught separately, because the prompt schema is the most reusable skill.
Module 3: Prototype and refine : Sections 6, 8, 10, 11, and 12. This module focuses on building a first version, reviewing it, and improving it through stronger feedback.
Module 4: Package and validate : Sections 13, 14, 15, and 16. This module covers SCORM, web forks, Moodle testing, and package structure.
Module 5: Compare workflows and scale up : Sections 17 onward plus the appendices. This is where students or teams can think about maintainability, versioning, technology choices, and broader platform questions.
If you are using this document in a university course, it often works better as a staged lab manual than as a single assigned reading. If you are using it in a workshop or faculty training context, the prompt schema and the appendices are often the most portable pieces.
[Heading2] 2. The Core Idea: Treat Codex Like a Build Partner
The most useful mindset is this:
⚠  Codex should not be treated like a one-shot generator that magically outputs finished courseware from a single prompt.
Instead, treat Codex like a technical build partner who helps you through an iterative production process.
That means:
You define the learning goal clearly.
Codex builds a first working version.
You review it in context.
You identify concrete issues.
Codex refines the artifact.
You test it in the target delivery environment.
You preserve stable versions and split deliverables when necessary.
This process is much more reliable than trying to get a perfect final artifact in one shot.
[Heading2] 3. What Kinds of E-Learning Content This Workflow Supports
This workflow can be adapted to many content types.
[Heading3] Type A: Interactive Explainer
Examples:
a timeline
a concept walkthrough
a process animation
a layered infographic
a guided scientific explanation
Good if the main goal is conceptual understanding.
[Heading3] Type B: Quiz or Practice Object
Examples:
multiple-choice quiz
short-answer practice
flashcard interaction
mastery quiz
repeated retrieval practice
Good if the main goal is assessment or reinforcement.
[Heading3] Type C: Branching Scenario
Examples:
clinical decision tree
classroom management simulation
ethics case study
customer service scenario
language practice conversation path
Good if the main goal is decision-making or situated judgment.
[Heading3] Type D: Simulation or Sandbox
Examples:
parameter-driven system model
policy simulator
lab-style interaction
feedback-rich mechanical or scientific system
exploratory decision sandbox
Good if the main goal is systems thinking, experimentation, or mechanism understanding.
[Heading3] Type E: Data Visualization for Learning
Examples:
interactive chart explainer
geographic learning map
comparative data story
longitudinal data interface
science or policy data exploration tool
Good if the main goal is interpretation, pattern recognition, or analytical reasoning.
[Heading3] Type F: Mini-Game or Gamified Learning Object
Examples:
timed arithmetic challenge
matching game
classification game
puzzle-based learning interaction
scoring-based memory task
Good if the main goal is engagement plus repeated practice.
The rest of this tutorial applies to all of these types.
[Heading2] 4. Decide the Delivery Target Before You Build
Before asking Codex to write code, decide how the content will be delivered.
This affects architecture, tracking, packaging, and testing.
[Heading3] Option A: LMS Delivery via SCORM
Choose this if you need:
Moodle upload
LMS launch behavior
completion tracking
score reporting
re-entry / resume behavior
package-level testing
[Heading3] Option B: Browser-Based Web App
Choose this if you need:
easy sharing via URL
quick feedback loops
simpler hosting
demo or presentation use
standalone HTML behavior
[Heading3] Option C: Both SCORM and Web
This is often the best setup when you are exploring a learning concept and also testing LMS compatibility.
Why?
the SCORM version helps with LMS realism
the web version helps with iteration and sharing
keeping both lets you separate content behavior from LMS packaging behavior
This is especially useful when you are testing whether AI-authored or code-authored learning content can function as courseware.
[Heading3] A Practical Note on Local Moodle as a Sandbox
One of the most useful practical lessons from our work is that a local Moodle instance is often the right first sandbox for LMS testing. This is not because Moodle represents every LMS perfectly. It does not. It is useful because it is relatively accessible, testable, and repeatable. When you are trying to understand whether a coded learning object actually behaves like courseware, what you need first is a stable place to upload, launch, break, revise, and re-test. A local Moodle sandbox gives you that loop.
This is especially valuable when you are moving from prototypes into runtime questions such as:
Does the package upload cleanly?
Does it launch correctly?
Does state persist?
Does re-entry work?
Do score and completion behave as expected?
Those are not theoretical questions. They are implementation questions, and they are much easier to answer when you control the environment.
At the same time, Moodle should not be treated as a universal proxy for every LMS. A package that behaves well in Moodle may still behave differently in Canvas, Blackboard, or another platform. So the right mindset is:
use Moodle as your first practical sandbox
use it to discover and fix obvious packaging and runtime issues
then validate more broadly if cross-platform compatibility matters
That distinction is important because it keeps the sandbox useful without making claims that it cannot support.
[Heading3] A Practical Note on Articulate and Code-Authored Content
Another major theme in our conversations was the question of whether vibe coding, or more broadly code-authored learning content, can substitute for tools like Articulate. That framing is worth including here because it changes what you test for.
If you compare code-authored content to a traditional authoring tool, the real question is usually not "Can I make something visually similar?" It is "Can I reproduce enough of the invisible runtime work that established authoring tools already handle?" Tools like Articulate are not only slide builders. They also act as translators between content, packaging, state, reporting, and LMS runtime expectations.
That means a serious replacement workflow should test at least three layers:
the learning interaction itself
the packaging and runtime behavior
the maintainability of the content as it changes
This is one reason why the tutorial emphasizes SCORM, persistence, version splitting, and Moodle-based testing. If you only test appearance, you are not really testing whether code-authored content can function as courseware.
[Heading3] Maintainability as a Test Dimension
The third layer above should not remain abstract. If maintainability is part of the comparison, it needs to be tested deliberately rather than mentioned rhetorically.
One practical maintainability test is to build the same small learning object in two forms:
a traditional authoring-tool version
a code-authored version
Then apply the same change requests to both. Useful change requests include:
revise introductory copy
add one new quiz item
change the scoring rule
reorder one screen or state
localize key interface text
adjust the visual theme
alter one branching path
For each change, record:
time to implement
ease of review by another teammate
visibility of what changed
rollback difficulty
mergeability with concurrent work
regression risk after the change
This is where code-authored content often shows a real advantage. Source files can be versioned in Git, diffed line by line, reviewed in pull requests, branched safely, and merged with greater visibility. By contrast, a .story file from Storyline is a binary authoring file. It can certainly be backed up and versioned at the file level, but it is much harder to inspect, diff, or merge in the same transparent way as code.
That does not automatically make code better in every context, but it does make maintainability testable rather than merely aspirational.
[Heading3] A More Balanced Comparison with Articulate
The comparison should also stay intellectually honest. There are several domains where Articulate remains genuinely strong.
Articulate often remains advantageous when teams need:
slide-based narrative authoring
rapid assembly by non-developers
template-driven course construction
built-in review workflows for nontechnical stakeholders
fast prototyping for conventional compliance or training modules
teams that are already institutionally standardized on Storyline or Rise
Code-authored workflows are often stronger when teams need:
unusual or highly custom interactions
visualization-heavy or simulation-heavy experiences
fine-grained version control
deeper extensibility
automation and scriptability
closer integration with software development workflows
In other words, the question is not whether one tool "wins" universally. The more responsible question is which workflow is stronger for which kind of problem.
[Heading3] Cost, Access, and Institutional Adoption
Cost is also part of the real comparison, especially for departments, labs, and institutions deciding whether to broaden access to e-learning production.
As of April 17, 2026, Articulate's official pricing page listed Articulate 360 AI at $1,449 USD / user / year for Personal and $1,749 USD / user / year for Teams, with academic discounts and other plan variations noted on the pricing page. Because pricing changes, readers should verify current numbers directly on Articulate's official pricing page before using them in institutional planning. Source
By contrast, an AI-assisted code-authored workflow usually shifts cost into a different structure:
model or API usage if applicable
developer or staff time
hosting or deployment costs
training and maintenance overhead
This does not mean the code-authored route is always cheaper. In some settings, staff time may outweigh license savings. But it does mean the cost model is different, and often more flexible. A department that cannot justify a proprietary seat for every contributor may still be able to support a shared code-and-AI workflow, especially when outputs can be versioned, reviewed, and extended collaboratively.
That is why cost and access should be discussed alongside pedagogy and runtime behavior. They are part of the institutional feasibility question, not merely an administrative afterthought.
[Heading3] What This Document Still Does Not Prove
It is equally important to say what this document does not yet establish. The strongest framing in this tutorial is the claim that the important question is not whether code-authored content can look similar to an Articulate course, but whether it can reproduce the invisible runtime work that established authoring tools already handle. That framing is one of the tutorial's central strengths.
However, the framing is stronger than the evidence currently contained in this document. The tutorial does not yet provide:
a true side-by-side build of the same learning object in Articulate and in a code-authored workflow
measured comparative results across the three evaluation layers
a full institutional cost comparison based on actual staffing and deployment assumptions
empirical evidence showing cross-platform equivalence across multiple LMS environments
That means the document should be read as a rigorous workflow and evaluation framework, not as a completed proof that code-authored learning objects have already replaced Articulate across the board.
[Heading3] A Strong Student Project or Research Assignment
One productive way to turn this limitation into a strength is to frame it directly as a student project, lab study, or comparative design assignment.
A strong project prompt would be:
Build the same learning object twice, once in Articulate and once in an AI-assisted code workflow, then compare both versions across three layers:
interaction quality
packaging and LMS runtime behavior
maintainability over time
The project should keep the learning goal constant and vary only the authoring workflow. That structure turns the current document into a scaffold for empirical work rather than a claim that has already been settled.
Useful comparison criteria might include:
instructional fidelity to the same learning objective
time to first working prototype
quality of the learner interaction
success of SCORM packaging and resume behavior
ease of revision
visibility of changes
ability to collaborate across contributors
cost assumptions for scaling the workflow institutionally
This kind of assignment is especially useful in instructional design, learning engineering, educational technology, or digital pedagogy programs because it requires students to compare not just interfaces, but authoring logics, runtime assumptions, and maintenance workflows.
[Heading2] 5. The Non-Negotiable Prompt Components
Before your first major prompt, define these components explicitly.
These are not optional if you want reliable results.
If you omit them, Codex will fill the gap by inference, and that is often where instructional mismatch begins.
Just as important:
The same component names used in your planning notes should also appear in your actual prompts.
In other words, the conceptual explanation and the prompt structure should match one another exactly.
If your planning section says:
Learning goal
Audience
Content type
Core interactions
Feedback or assessment behavior
Content or data source
Tracking and persistence requirements
Deployment target
Technical constraints
then your prompt should use those same headings.
Do not switch halfway into vague language like:
make it nice
build something interactive
keep it educational
add some tracking somehow
That breaks alignment between the instructional concept and the implementation request.
The practical reason this matters is straightforward. Most weak AI-assisted build processes do not fail because the model "cannot code." They fail because the build request does not preserve the educational logic with enough precision. If the learning goal is described vaguely, the resulting interaction may be visually appealing but instructionally shallow. If the audience is omitted, the language level, pacing, and feedback style may be wrong. If the tracking and persistence requirements are not stated, the activity may appear functional until you try to package it for SCORM or restore state after re-entry. In other words, these components are not administrative metadata. They are the design contract between your instructional intent and the implementation.
It is also worth stressing that many e-learning problems are not purely UI problems. They are alignment problems between pedagogy, runtime behavior, and packaging. A prompt that only specifies the interface often produces something that looks plausible but does not behave like courseware. A stronger prompt makes the instructional model visible in the request itself. That is why this section should be treated as a required schema, not as optional planning advice.
[Heading3] 5.1 Learning Goal
What should learners understand, practice, or decide differently after using the content?
Examples:
Understand the greenhouse effect
Compare country-level educational performance patterns
Practice arithmetic fluency
Make better triage decisions in a simulated case
Identify misleading data displays
The learning goal should be written as a learner outcome, not as a production description. "Build a cool simulation" is not a learning goal. "Help learners understand how variable changes alter system behavior" is. This distinction matters because Codex will build different interaction structures depending on whether the request is framed as spectacle, explanation, practice, or decision support. A precise learning goal also makes revision easier later. When you evaluate the result, you can ask whether the activity actually advances the stated outcome rather than merely looking polished.
[Heading3] 5.2 Audience
Who is the learner?
Examples:
middle school students
undergraduate learners
graduate students
K-12 teachers
healthcare trainees
public-facing adult learners
Audience matters because the same interaction can feel appropriate or completely wrong depending on who the learner is. A public-facing explainer may need gentle onboarding and minimal jargon, while a graduate-level data tool can assume higher tolerance for complexity and denser terminology. If you omit the audience, Codex tends to default toward a generic professional-user tone, which may not fit classroom, outreach, or novice-training contexts.
[Heading3] 5.3 Content Type
What kind of interaction is it?
Examples:
explainer
quiz
scenario
simulation
data visualization
game
This component matters because content type is not just a label. It implies a different instructional rhythm. An explainer typically favors sequence and framing. A quiz favors item progression and feedback timing. A branching scenario favors consequence and path memory. A simulation favors parameter response and interpretability. If content type is underspecified, Codex may build an interface that contains the right pieces but uses the wrong overall logic.
[Heading3] 5.4 Core Interactions
What does the learner actually do?
Examples:
click through a guided explanation
answer one question at a time
choose between branching options
adjust simulation variables
filter and inspect data
manipulate objects in a scene
This should describe learner actions, not just interface features.
That distinction is important. Saying "include a left panel and a timeline" describes interface furniture. Saying "the learner compares states across time and selects one case for deeper inspection" describes the actual learning action. Prompts become much stronger when they focus on what the learner must do to move through the experience. This is especially useful when you later ask for revisions, because you can preserve the learner action model even while changing layout, visuals, or implementation details.
[Heading3] 5.5 Feedback or Assessment Behavior
How will the learning object respond?
Examples:
correct / incorrect feedback
score accumulation
reflective feedback
branching consequences
sandbox observation only
hint system
Many e-learning builds become instructionally thin because they stop at interactivity and never specify response behavior. A good learning object does not merely wait for input; it reacts in a way that supports learning. That reaction could be corrective, explanatory, reflective, comparative, cumulative, or state-based. The more clearly you define this here, the less likely you are to end up with an interface that accepts actions without teaching anything meaningful through them.
[Heading3] 5.6 Content or Data Source
What content is the object built from?
Examples:
fixed instructional text
authored quiz items
scenario script
mock data
CSV or JSON dataset
manually embedded metadata
generated placeholder content for the first build
If this is unclear, the structure may be correct but the content layer may drift.
This section is important because Codex needs to know whether it is authoring the learning material itself, scaffolding around existing material, or using mock content temporarily. Those are very different situations. If you already have a dataset, a scenario script, or a set of quiz items, say so. If placeholder content is acceptable, say that too. Otherwise you may get a well-built shell with content assumptions that do not match the real project.
[Heading3] 5.7 Tracking and Persistence Requirements
What should be remembered, measured, or reported?
Examples:
score
current step
selected answers
selected scenario path
visited states
completion
time on task
selected filters
resume state
This is especially important for SCORM or any learning-engineering use case.
This is often the most neglected component in early prompts, and it is one of the most expensive to retrofit later. If the object will eventually live in an LMS, or if you care about empirical testing, you need to decide what counts as meaningful state. Not everything needs to be tracked, but the important things must be. For a quiz, that may be score and question position. For a scenario, it may be path and current decision point. For a simulation, it may be variable settings and completed tasks. For a data exploration tool, it may be selected view, filters, and focal entity. When this is omitted, the first working version may look fine, but packaging and resume behavior often become messy later.
[Heading3] 5.8 Deployment Target
Will it be:
Moodle SCORM
standard website
both
If you do not decide this early, your later revisions become harder.
This is not just an operational detail. It affects how state is stored, how assets are organized, how dependencies are handled, and how testing should be done. A browser-only prototype can tolerate decisions that are inconvenient inside an LMS. A SCORM package must think ahead about manifest structure, launch behavior, and resumable state. If you know the target is "both," that should shape the architecture from the beginning.
[Heading3] 5.9 Technical Constraints
What constraints matter?
Examples:
single HTML file
plain HTML/CSS/JS only
no external libraries
specific library version
SCORM 1.2 compatibility
mobile support
local-only assets
Technical constraints should be written in the same practical spirit as the rest of the prompt. They are not there to sound rigorous. They are there to prevent later mismatches. If a project must be a single HTML file, or must avoid external libraries, or must stay compatible with a specific SCORM profile, that needs to be established early so Codex makes structural choices accordingly.
[Heading3] 5.10 First-Version Scope
What should the first build optimize for?
Examples:
working structure over polish
placeholder content is acceptable
mock data is acceptable
keep code easy to revise
do not package for SCORM yet
This component matters because it tells Codex what not to optimize too early.
This is one of the most effective ways to preserve momentum. Many projects stall because the first request asks for final design, complete content, packaging, tracking, and deployment all at once. A strong "first-version scope" statement tells Codex what level of completeness is actually required right now. It creates permission to build a stable draft instead of prematurely polishing everything.
[Heading3] 5.11 Canonical Prompt Schema
Use this schema consistently.
If possible, keep these labels unchanged across:
your notes
your initial prompt
your revision prompts
your packaging prompts
Canonical schema:
Learning goal:
Audience:
Content type:
Core interactions:
Feedback or assessment behavior:
Content or data source:
Tracking and persistence requirements:
Deployment target:
Technical constraints:
For the first version:
The strength of this schema is not only that it is comprehensive. It is that it is reusable. Once you get used to this structure, you can carry it from one project to the next and adjust only the contents inside each heading. That consistency makes collaboration much faster because you no longer need to reinvent the shape of the request every time.
[Heading2] 6. The Best Overall Workflow
Here is the most reliable end-to-end sequence.
[Heading3] Stage 1: Define the Learning Artifact
Clarify:
learning goal
audience
content type
core interactions
feedback or assessment behavior
content or data source
tracking and persistence requirements
deployment target
technical constraints
first-version scope
[Heading3] Stage 2: Ask for a Functional First Version
At this stage, prioritize:
structure
behavior
correctness of the core interaction
Do not prioritize:
final polish
advanced packaging
complex tracking
[Heading3] Stage 3: Open and Review the Output
Use the browser.
Look at:
layout
readability
interaction flow
clarity of instructions
feedback behavior
performance
This stage deserves more emphasis than it usually gets. Interactive learning content should not be reviewed only by reading code or by mentally simulating how it might behave. You need to see it, click through it, misread it once or twice, and notice where friction appears. The browser review is where many of the most important issues reveal themselves: overly dense instructions, confusing hierarchy, weak onboarding, unclear feedback timing, or small UI choices that undermine the learning flow.
[Heading3] Stage 4: Give Concrete Revision Feedback
Focus on categories such as:
learning clarity
layout
tone
pacing
tracking
technical bugs
[Heading3] Stage 5: Stabilize the Core Learning Experience
Before you package or deploy widely, make sure:
the logic is right
the interaction makes sense
the learner flow is coherent
the visuals support the learning task
This is the point in the workflow where you deliberately resist the temptation to package too soon. If the learning experience is still unstable, SCORM packaging or formal deployment will only hide the real problem under runtime complexity. Stabilization means confirming that the object teaches what it is supposed to teach, that the activity logic is internally coherent, and that learners have a reasonable path through the experience.
[Heading3] Stage 6: Add Runtime Packaging or Persistence
Only after the main experience works:
add SCORM packaging
add resume logic
add score or completion logic
add localStorage for web persistence
[Heading3] Stage 7: Test in the Real Target Environment
For SCORM:
upload to Moodle
launch
interact
exit
re-enter
verify state restoration
For web:
open from local preview or hosting
verify persistence
verify layout across sizes if needed
[Heading3] Stage 8: Split Stable Versions
Preserve:
SCORM version
web version
maybe a source or template version
Do not keep rewriting one file forever for every use case.
[Heading2] 7. How to Write Your First Prompt
A strong first prompt should include the same non-negotiable components defined in Section 5.
This is important enough to say directly:
The explanation layer and the prompt layer should use the same structure.
If you define ten components in your concept framing, your prompt should reflect those same ten components.
This may sound repetitive, but it is one of the tutorial's central claims. A mismatch between planning language and prompt language usually leads to a mismatch between educational intent and implemented behavior. If your concept notes are detailed but your prompt collapses into vague directives, the resulting output will likely preserve only part of the design logic. Keeping the same headings forces the key design decisions to remain visible at implementation time.
[Heading3] Generic First Prompt Template
Create an interactive e-learning object.
Learning goal:
[What learners should understand, practice, or decide]
Audience:
[Who the learners are]
Content type:
[quiz / simulation / explainer / branching scenario / game / data visualization]
Core interactions:
[ListParagraph] [interaction 1]
[ListParagraph] [interaction 2]
[ListParagraph] [interaction 3]
Feedback or assessment behavior:
[ListParagraph] [feedback rule 1]
[ListParagraph] [feedback rule 2]
Content or data source:
[ListParagraph] [existing authored content / mock content / dataset / scenario script / generated placeholder]
Tracking and persistence requirements:
[ListParagraph] [what should be tracked]
[ListParagraph] [what should be restorable]
Deployment target:
[SCORM / web app / both]
Technical constraints:
[ListParagraph] [single HTML or multi-file]
[ListParagraph] [allowed libraries]
[ListParagraph] [runtime restrictions]
[ListParagraph] [mobile or desktop needs]
For the first version:
[ListParagraph] prioritize a working instructional structure over visual polish
[ListParagraph] use mock data or placeholder content if needed
[ListParagraph] keep the code easy to revise
This template works across many content types because it preserves alignment between instructional planning and prompt application.
In practice, this means you can use the same mental model whether you are building a scenario, a mini-game, a data explainer, or a quiz. The details change, but the prompt architecture stays stable. That stability is what makes the workflow teachable and repeatable.
[Heading2] 8. Example First Prompts for Different Content Types
Below are reusable prompt examples.
[Heading2] 8.1 Quiz Object
Create an interactive quiz-based e-learning object.
Learning goal:
Help learners practice recognizing misleading visualizations in data communication.
Audience:
Undergraduate students in an introductory research methods course.
Content type:
Quiz with explanations.
Core interactions:
[ListParagraph] present one visual example at a time
[ListParagraph] ask the learner to identify the issue
[ListParagraph] provide immediate explanation after each response
Feedback or assessment behavior:
[ListParagraph] show whether the choice is correct
[ListParagraph] explain why
[ListParagraph] keep score across the activity
Content or data source:
[ListParagraph] authored quiz items with image or chart examples
[ListParagraph] placeholder examples are acceptable for the first version
Tracking and persistence requirements:
[ListParagraph] track current item
[ListParagraph] track score
[ListParagraph] track completed items
[ListParagraph] restore learner position if resumed
Deployment target:
Both SCORM and web.
Technical constraints:
[ListParagraph] plain HTML/CSS/JS
[ListParagraph] first version can be single HTML
[ListParagraph] keep the code easy to package later
For the first version:
[ListParagraph] prioritize working quiz flow over final styling
[Heading2] 8.2 Branching Scenario
Create a branching scenario for teacher decision-making.
Learning goal:
Help novice teachers practice responding to classroom disruption.
Audience:
Pre-service teachers.
Content type:
Branching scenario.
Core interactions:
[ListParagraph] show a classroom situation
[ListParagraph] offer 3 possible responses
[ListParagraph] branch to the consequence of the chosen response
[ListParagraph] continue for several decision rounds
Feedback or assessment behavior:
[ListParagraph] show short consequences immediately
[ListParagraph] provide reflective summary at the end
Content or data source:
[ListParagraph] authored classroom scenario script
[ListParagraph] placeholder dialogue is acceptable initially
Tracking and persistence requirements:
[ListParagraph] track current decision point
[ListParagraph] track decision path
[ListParagraph] restore the learner to the current step on resume
Deployment target:
Web app first, SCORM later.
Technical constraints:
[ListParagraph] single HTML
[ListParagraph] no frameworks unless necessary
[ListParagraph] keep state tracking explicit and readable
For the first version:
[ListParagraph] prioritize branching logic clarity over visual polish
[Heading2] 8.3 Simulation
Create a learning simulation where the learner adjusts variables and observes system behavior.
Learning goal:
Help learners understand how interest rates, inflation, and unemployment interact in a simplified model.
Audience:
Introductory economics students.
Content type:
Interactive simulation.
Core interactions:
[ListParagraph] adjust variables with sliders
[ListParagraph] view changing indicators
[ListParagraph] reset the simulation
[ListParagraph] compare a few preset scenarios
Feedback or assessment behavior:
[ListParagraph] explanatory annotations when values shift significantly
[ListParagraph] optional guided tasks
Content or data source:
[ListParagraph] simplified model with mock values is acceptable initially
Tracking and persistence requirements:
[ListParagraph] track current control settings
[ListParagraph] track whether guided tasks were completed
[ListParagraph] restore current simulation state if resumed
Deployment target:
Web app first.
Technical constraints:
[ListParagraph] single HTML
[ListParagraph] clear code structure
[ListParagraph] responsive enough for laptop use
For the first version:
[ListParagraph] prioritize a working model and readable controls
[Heading2] 8.4 Data Visualization
Create an interactive learning visualization.
Learning goal:
Help learners compare how educational performance changes across countries and years.
Audience:
Graduate students in education policy.
Content type:
Interactive data visualization.
Core interactions:
[ListParagraph] browse country-level data
[ListParagraph] filter by year
[ListParagraph] inspect a selected country
[ListParagraph] compare regions
Feedback or assessment behavior:
[ListParagraph] explanatory tooltips
[ListParagraph] summary panel for selected item
Content or data source:
[ListParagraph] structured mock data is acceptable initially
Tracking and persistence requirements:
[ListParagraph] track selected item
[ListParagraph] track active filters
[ListParagraph] track current year or view state
[ListParagraph] restore the current view if resumed
Deployment target:
Both SCORM and web.
Technical constraints:
[ListParagraph] use a browser-based visualization approach
[ListParagraph] keep the first version focused on structure
[ListParagraph] package later for SCORM
For the first version:
[ListParagraph] prioritize clear structure and inspectable state over visual flourish
[Heading2] 9. Why You Should Not Ask for SCORM First
⚠  This is one of the most important practical rules.
⚠  Do not start with SCORM unless your content is already conceptually simple and stable.
Why?
SCORM adds packaging requirements
SCORM adds persistence constraints
SCORM slows iteration
SCORM makes debugging harder if your base interaction is still changing
The better order is:
Build the learning interaction
Stabilize the interaction
Add SCORM packaging
Test in Moodle
SCORM is usually the wrapper, not the creative core.
[Heading2] 10. How to Review Intermediate Builds
After Codex creates a version, stop and review it before requesting more features.
This is where many projects either become much better or quietly drift off course. If you request new features immediately after every build, you accumulate unresolved design debt. A better approach is to pause and ask whether the current version is already doing the instructional job well. Review is not a formality between coding rounds. It is how you decide whether the object is becoming more teachable, more usable, and more suitable for the actual learners you care about.
[Heading3] 10.1 Review for Learning Quality
Ask:
Is the purpose clear?
Does the activity actually support the stated learning goal?
Are the instructions understandable?
Is the feedback educationally useful?
Is the pacing appropriate?
Does the interaction help learning rather than distract from it?
This category should come first on purpose. For e-learning work, visual impressiveness is secondary if the instructional logic is weak. A build can be technically correct and aesthetically polished while still missing the real learning need. Reviewing for learning quality keeps the project anchored in educational purpose rather than interface novelty.
[Heading3] 10.2 Review for Interaction Quality
Ask:
Is the flow intuitive?
Are the controls clear?
Is the next step obvious?
Are errors recoverable?
Does the learner understand what to do after each action?
Interaction quality matters because confusion at the control level often gets misdiagnosed as a content problem. If learners cannot tell what to do, where they are, or what happened after an action, the learning signal gets buried under interface friction. This is especially important in simulations and branching scenarios where state changes may not be obvious unless the interface explains them clearly.
[Heading3] 10.3 Review for Design Quality
Ask:
Is the layout balanced?
Is the content readable?
Is the tone appropriate for the audience?
Is the interface too busy?
Does the design support attention rather than scatter it?
Educational interfaces often benefit from restraint more than spectacle. This does not mean they must be boring. It means the visual system should direct attention toward the learning task rather than continually compete with it. Design review is therefore not about taste alone; it is about cognitive support.
[Heading3] 10.4 Review for Technical Quality
Ask:
Does the app load correctly?
Is state preserved when it should be?
Are there visible runtime errors?
Is the logic consistent?
Does it work in the target container?
Technical review is where you catch the difference between a concept demo and a reliable learning object. State loss, packaging assumptions, performance bottlenecks, or layout breakage inside an LMS frame may not appear until this point. That is why technical review must remain tied to the real deployment environment, not only to a local browser tab.
[Heading2] 11. How to Give Better Revision Feedback
Codex works best when feedback is concrete and categorized.
[Heading3] Weak Feedback
This feels off.
The design is weird.
It is not very good yet.
[Heading3] Strong Feedback
Learning clarity:
[ListParagraph] The instructions are too vague at the start.
[ListParagraph] The learner does not know what success looks like.
Layout:
[ListParagraph] The top header is too large.
[ListParagraph] The side panel is consuming too much width.
Interaction:
[ListParagraph] The feedback appears too late.
[ListParagraph] The reset button is hard to find.
Tone:
[ListParagraph] The visual style is too dark and dramatic for the subject matter.
[ListParagraph] I want something clearer and more editorial.
Persistence:
[ListParagraph] Keep the learner's current step and score when they return.
This kind of feedback is much easier to act on.
[Heading2] 12. The Most Useful Follow-Up Prompt Types
Once you have a first version, most revisions fall into a few recurring prompt categories.
[Heading2] 12.1 Structure Prompt
Use when the interaction model needs to change.
Please revise the structure of the activity.
Keep the topic and content, but change the interaction flow so the learner moves through:
1. introduction
2. guided practice
3. independent attempt
4. summary
[Heading2] 12.2 Feedback Prompt
Use when the educational feedback needs improvement.
Improve the feedback logic.
I want the learner to receive immediate explanatory feedback after each action, not only a correctness label.
Keep the scoring model, but make the feedback more instructionally useful.
[Heading2] 12.3 Layout Prompt
Use when the interface feels off-balance.
Redesign the layout so the learning task is more central.
Reduce visual clutter, improve spacing, and make the main interaction area dominant.
Keep the same content and logic.
[Heading2] 12.4 Tone Prompt
Use when the visual style feels wrong.
The current tone is too dark and cinematic.
Please make the interface brighter, clearer, and more appropriate for educational use.
Reduce glow, visual noise, and unnecessary effects.
[Heading2] 12.5 Tracking Prompt
Use when you want measurable interaction data.
Add interaction tracking for:
[ListParagraph] total clicks
[ListParagraph] completed steps
[ListParagraph] selected responses
[ListParagraph] time spent in each section
Store the tracking in a way that can later be mapped to SCORM or local persistence.
[Heading2] 12.6 Accessibility Prompt
Use when accessibility needs to improve.
Improve accessibility.
Please review color contrast, keyboard reachability, focus visibility, button labeling, and screen-readable structure.
Do not change the instructional logic unless needed.
[Heading2] 12.7 Localization Prompt
Use when you want a language change.
Convert the UI and learner-facing text to English.
Keep the data and interaction logic unchanged.
Make sure labels, buttons, instructions, and feedback text are all updated consistently.
[Heading2] 13. How to Ask for SCORM Packaging
Once the learning object works well, you can ask Codex to package it for SCORM.
SCORM packaging should be treated as a translation step from interactive content into LMS-compatible courseware. It is not merely a zip operation. It forces you to decide which parts of learner activity count as progress, which parts should be restorable, and how the runtime should behave when the learner exits and returns. A learning object that works beautifully in a free browser environment can still behave poorly in an LMS if these questions were never clarified.
[Heading3] Default SCORM Baseline for This Tutorial
Unless otherwise noted, this tutorial assumes SCORM 1.2 as the default baseline. That choice is deliberate. SCORM 1.2 remains the safest starting point for beginner and intermediate workflows because it is broadly supported and easier to reason about when you are first learning how packaging, status, score, and resume state fit together.
SCORM 2004 is real and still relevant in some environments, but it should not be casually mixed into an introductory workflow. The manifest structure, data model expectations, and sequencing assumptions differ enough that beginners can easily confuse the two if the document slides back and forth between them. For that reason, this tutorial treats SCORM 2004 as an advanced branch, not as the default path.
If you decide to use SCORM 2004, do so intentionally and document that choice clearly in the prompt, the manifest, and the testing plan. Do not write a SCORM 1.2 tutorial prompt and then quietly substitute a SCORM 2004 package structure later.
[Heading3] SCORM Is a Wrapper, Not a Rendering Style
This point is essential because many people mistakenly treat SCORM as though it were a visual technology. It is not. SCORM does not tell you whether your learning object should be plain HTML, a quiz UI, a simulation, a D3 chart, a Three.js scene, a Canvas-based game, or a React interface. SCORM is primarily a packaging and runtime convention for LMS delivery.
That means many different front-end approaches can still be SCORM-compatible if they are packaged correctly and if the runtime state is managed properly. In practical terms, this means you can wrap things like:
plain HTML/CSS/JS interactions
D3-based visualizations
Three.js scenes
Canvas-based games
framework-based interfaces
inside a SCORM package, as long as the result still respects SCORM packaging, launch, and persistence requirements.
This matters because it lets you think more clearly about your technology choices. The rendering approach should be chosen based on what best supports the learning task. SCORM comes afterward as the delivery wrapper if an LMS target is required.
[Heading3] When SCORM Is Not Enough: xAPI and cmi5
Our conversations also raised an important extension point: sometimes SCORM is necessary, but not sufficient.
SCORM is good when you mainly need:
launch in an LMS
completion
score
resume
basic tracking
But if you want richer learning analytics, finer-grained event logging, or a stronger learning-engineering instrumentation layer, you may eventually need to think about xAPI or cmi5.
A practical way to think about them is:
SCORM is strong for conventional LMS packaging and baseline runtime behavior
xAPI is strong for richer event statements and learning-experience data
cmi5 is useful when you want xAPI-style richness with a stronger LMS launch-and-assignment model
You do not need to begin every project with xAPI or cmi5. In fact, it is often better not to. But it is important to know when the project is starting to outgrow what SCORM can comfortably express. If the learning object requires detailed action traces, richer evidence of engagement, or more modern state/reporting patterns, then xAPI or cmi5 may become the next layer after the initial SCORM sandbox.
[Heading3] A Practical Transition Path from SCORM to xAPI or cmi5
The most practical way to extend beyond SCORM is not to throw away the original object and start over. A better approach is staged.
Build and stabilize the activity as a web object or SCORM 1.2 package.
Identify the meaningful learner events you actually care about.
Map those events into a more explicit event model.
If richer analytics are needed, add xAPI statement logic.
If LMS launch-and-assignment structure also matters in that richer model, evaluate cmi5 as the next packaging layer.
For example, a SCORM quiz might initially track:
current question
score
completion
suspend_data for resume
An xAPI-enhanced version of that same object might additionally emit:
question presented
answer selected
answer changed
hint opened
explanation viewed
quiz completed
And a cmi5-based version would add a more formal LMS launch model on top of that richer event structure.
The key point is that xAPI and cmi5 should be treated as purposeful extensions, not as prestige upgrades. If SCORM already supports the instructional and operational requirements, stay there. If the project genuinely needs richer event evidence or a more modern instrumentation layer, then expand deliberately.
[Heading3] Generic SCORM Conversion Prompt
Convert this learning object into a SCORM 1.2 package.
Requirements:
[ListParagraph] use a single SCO
[ListParagraph] include imsmanifest.xml at the package root
[ListParagraph] keep the main launch file as index.html
[ListParagraph] include a lightweight scormdriver.js wrapper
Track at least:
[ListParagraph] learner progress through the activity
[ListParagraph] score or completion if applicable
[ListParagraph] key interaction state needed for resume
Persistence:
[ListParagraph] store state in suspend_data
[ListParagraph] restore state on re-entry
Compatibility:
[ListParagraph] package should be suitable for Moodle upload
[Heading3] A Note on `scormdriver.js`
Many practical SCORM examples refer to a small wrapper file such as scormdriver.js. In this tutorial, that name is used generically to describe a local helper that simplifies SCORM 1.2 API calls from the main activity code. It is not meant to imply one canonical public library or one required repository.
That ambiguity can confuse beginners, so the safest rule is this: if you mention scormdriver.js in a prompt, either provide the actual file in the project or provide a minimal inline implementation that the reader can inspect. This tutorial now does both. A minimal working version is included in the appendix and in the companion example files so the reference is concrete rather than abstract.
[Heading3] What to Track Depends on the Content Type
For quizzes, track:
score
attempt completion
question index
selected answers
For scenarios, track:
decision path
current step
completion
For simulations, track:
current variables
learner position in the activity
whether guided tasks were completed
For visualizations, track:
selected item
active filters
current year or state
whether the learner explored required components
SCORM tracking should serve the learning design, not just record random clicks.
That sentence is worth taking seriously. It is easy to over-track whatever is technically available. But useful SCORM state should reflect the instructional structure, not just interface exhaust. A better question than "What can we track?" is "What state does the learning experience actually need in order to resume coherently or report meaningfully?"
[Heading2] 14. How to Ask for a Separate Web Version
Once the SCORM version works, ask for a separate web version instead of stripping SCORM out of the same file in place.
[Heading3] Generic Web Fork Prompt
Create a separate web deployment version.
Important:
[ListParagraph] do not delete or overwrite the SCORM version
[ListParagraph] create a separate web version for browser deployment
[ListParagraph] replace SCORM persistence with localStorage
[ListParagraph] preserve the same learner-facing behavior where possible
[ListParagraph] keep the visual design aligned with the SCORM version
This version is useful for:
demos
sharing
rapid review
non-LMS use
[Heading3] A Practical Note on Google Classroom
Another point from our conversations is that Google Classroom should usually be treated as a web-link destination, not as a SCORM runtime target. If the real goal is "students open and use the activity from Classroom," the better workflow is often:
create the learning object
make a browser-deployable web version
host it
share the hosted link through Classroom
This matters because Classroom is not the same thing as a SCORM-capable LMS activity player. If you assume it will behave like Moodle SCORM delivery, you may choose the wrong packaging strategy. In practice, that means the tutorial's web-version fork is not only a convenience feature. It is often the right delivery path for platforms that accept links more naturally than SCORM packages.
[Heading2] 15. Moodle Testing Workflow
If the content is packaged as SCORM, test it in Moodle carefully.
Moodle testing should be treated as its own phase rather than a final checkbox. The same object can behave differently once it is embedded in the LMS context, especially around launch behavior, frame size, persistence, grading, and re-entry. If the project is meant to support LMS delivery, this environment is not incidental. It is part of the product.
[Heading3] Moodle Version Assumption
Unless otherwise noted, the Moodle guidance in this tutorial assumes Moodle 4.3+ as the default reference point. This matters because Moodle's navigation, settings grouping, and SCORM activity screens are not identical across major versions. A tutorial that casually mixes Moodle 3.x screenshots, Moodle 4.x labels, and generic SCORM instructions can create unnecessary friction for beginners.
If you are working in Moodle 3.x, the core ideas in this section still apply, but some settings may appear in different locations, and the activity-editing flow may not look exactly the same. For that reason, if a project is being documented for a real team, it is a good habit to name the Moodle baseline explicitly in both the tutorial and the testing checklist.
[Heading3] Recommended Test Flow
Open your Moodle test course
Add a SCORM package activity
Upload the zip
Launch it
Interact normally
Exit
Re-enter
Verify whether the saved state returns correctly
[Heading3] What to Check
Does the package upload cleanly?
Does the content launch?
Does it render correctly inside Moodle?
Are instructions still readable in the LMS frame?
Does completion behave correctly?
Does score reporting behave correctly if used?
Does resume work?
Does the learner return to the correct place?
When possible, do not test this only once. A better pattern is to run several short loops: launch, interact lightly, exit, re-enter, then try again after a more substantial interaction sequence. This helps you distinguish between superficial success and truly stable resume behavior. It is common for a package to appear fine on first launch but fail once more meaningful state accumulates.
[Heading3] Moodle Settings Often Worth Checking
display package in current window
grading method
maximum grade
number of attempts
force new attempt
auto-continue
auto-commit
The correct setting depends on the object, but testing should always include re-entry and persistence.
It is also helpful to think of Moodle as part content host, part diagnostic environment. If something is wrong, ask whether the problem belongs to the visualization or activity itself, the SCORM packaging layer, or the LMS interpretation of state and attempts. That separation can save a lot of debugging time.
[Heading3] LMS Comparison Snapshot
The table below is intentionally simplified, but it helps orient beginners who may otherwise assume every LMS behaves like Moodle.
Role in this tutorial
Main practical use
Main caution


Moodle 4.3+
Primary reference LMS
Best first sandbox for local upload, debugging, and resume testing
Do not assume Moodle behavior automatically generalizes to all LMS platforms

Canvas
Secondary validation target
Useful when institutional deployment or compatibility beyond Moodle matters
Launch flow, embedding details, and grading behavior should be re-tested rather than assumed

Blackboard
Secondary validation target
Useful when enterprise or institutional compatibility matters
Packaging may import, but runtime and reporting details can still differ from Moodle

SCORM Cloud
Neutral validation layer when available
Helpful for checking whether an issue is package-level or LMS-specific
Not a replacement for testing in the real destination LMS
[Heading3] Beyond Moodle: When Cross-Platform Validation Matters
If broad LMS compatibility matters, Moodle testing should not be your only checkpoint. Moodle is a very useful first sandbox, but it is not the end of the validation story. Once the object is stable in Moodle, a stronger validation sequence is often:
local Moodle for rapid debugging
SCORM Cloud or another neutral validation environment if available
a target platform such as Canvas or Blackboard when real compatibility matters
This is especially important if your project is not just a prototype, but part of a larger claim such as:
code-authored content can replace a traditional authoring workflow
the package is broadly LMS-compatible
the object is ready for wider institutional use
The broader the claim, the more the validation environment should expand beyond a single LMS sandbox.
It is important to be explicit here: this tutorial offers a validation method, not an empirical cross-platform result set. It tells you how to think about broader compatibility, but it does not by itself prove that a given package has already succeeded across Moodle, Canvas, Blackboard, and other LMS platforms. If you want to make that stronger claim in a paper, report, or institutional recommendation, you should record actual platform-by-platform findings.
A simple reporting table for that purpose might include:
LMS
Import success
Launch success
Resume success
Score/completion success
Notes


Example package
Moodle 4.3+
Yes/No
Yes/No
Yes/No
Yes/No
Observed issues

Example package
Canvas
Yes/No
Yes/No
Yes/No
Yes/No
Observed issues

Example package
Blackboard
Yes/No
Yes/No
That way, the guidance in this tutorial can become the basis for actual evidence rather than remaining only advisory.
[Heading2] 16. Suggested File Organization
A clean file structure makes iteration much easier.
Suggested structure:
moodle-install/
tutorials/
codex-collaboration-tutorial-en-generic-elearning.md
packages/
my-learning-object-scorm/
imsmanifest.xml
index.html
scormdriver.js
my-learning-object-scorm.zip
my-learning-object-web/
index.html
my-learning-object-web.html
If you do not want a separate tutorials folder, keeping the tutorial near the project root is also fine.
The key is to keep:
source files
zipped SCORM package
web version
documentation
clearly separated.
[Heading3] Minimal SCORM 1.2 Package Structure
The file organization example above is about project organization, not the internal zip structure by itself. That distinction matters because beginners often see a folder tree in a tutorial and assume that every file shown there belongs directly inside the SCORM package. It is better to be explicit.
For the default SCORM 1.2 workflow in this tutorial, the minimum internal zip structure should look something like this:
minimal-scorm-quiz/
imsmanifest.xml
index.html
scormdriver.js
assets/
optional-image.png
optional-style.css
The critical rule is that imsmanifest.xml must be at the package root inside the zip. If the manifest is buried one directory too deep, the LMS may reject the package or fail to launch it correctly. Likewise, if your launch file or runtime helper is referenced in the manifest but missing from the zip, the package may import but not run.
That is why the tutorial distinguishes between:
project-level file organization
package-internal required files
Those are related, but they are not the same thing.
[Heading2] 17. How to Prevent Chaos During Revision
When asking for changes, always say what should stay stable.
This is one of the most valuable prompt habits.
[Heading3] Example
Please improve the layout, but preserve:
[ListParagraph] the current data model
[ListParagraph] the scoring logic
[ListParagraph] the sequence of steps
[ListParagraph] the current state persistence approach
Only change spacing, hierarchy, and panel structure.
Another example:
Please rewrite the learner-facing instructions, but do not change:
[ListParagraph] the activity logic
[ListParagraph] the scoring behavior
[ListParagraph] the current file structure
This reduces accidental regressions.
This habit is particularly important once the project has more than one version or more than one delivery target. Without explicit scope control, a revision request aimed at tone or layout can accidentally alter state management, pacing, content structure, or packaging assumptions. Clear preservation instructions create safer iteration loops.
[Heading2] 18. How to Ask for Different Types of E-Learning Content
Below are reusable prompt patterns by content family.
[Heading2] 18.1 Interactive Explainer Prompt
Create an interactive explainer.
Learning goal:
[concept]
Audience:
[audience]
Content type:
Interactive explainer.
Core interactions:
[ListParagraph] section-based progression
[ListParagraph] small interactive reveals
[ListParagraph] short guided explanations
[ListParagraph] a summary at the end
Feedback or assessment behavior:
[ListParagraph] lightweight comprehension checks or guided explanatory responses as needed
Content or data source:
[ListParagraph] authored explanatory content
Tracking and persistence requirements:
[ListParagraph] track current section
[ListParagraph] restore the learner to the current section if resumed
Deployment target:
[web / both]
Technical constraints:
[ListParagraph] plain HTML/CSS/JS for the first version if possible
For the first version:
[ListParagraph] keep it concise, readable, and instructionally clear
[ListParagraph] build the first version in plain HTML/CSS/JS
[Heading2] 18.2 Practice Quiz Prompt
Create a practice quiz object.
Learning goal:
[skill to practice]
Audience:
[audience]
Content type:
Practice quiz.
Core interactions:
[ListParagraph] 10 items
[ListParagraph] one item at a time
[ListParagraph] learner submits an answer
[ListParagraph] learner can retry after finishing
Feedback or assessment behavior:
[ListParagraph] immediate explanatory feedback
[ListParagraph] final score
Content or data source:
[ListParagraph] authored quiz items
Tracking and persistence requirements:
[ListParagraph] track score
[ListParagraph] track current item
[ListParagraph] restore current item on resume if needed
Deployment target:
[SCORM / web / both]
Technical constraints:
[ListParagraph] keep the code easy to package for SCORM later
For the first version:
[ListParagraph] prioritize item flow and feedback clarity
[Heading2] 18.3 Branching Scenario Prompt
Create a branching decision scenario.
Learning goal:
[judgment or decision skill]
Audience:
[audience]
Content type:
Branching scenario.
Core interactions:
[ListParagraph] short setup scene
[ListParagraph] 3 choices per step
[ListParagraph] visible consequences
[ListParagraph] 4 to 6 total decision points
Feedback or assessment behavior:
[ListParagraph] immediate consequence feedback
[ListParagraph] reflective summary at the end
Content or data source:
[ListParagraph] authored scenario script
Tracking and persistence requirements:
[ListParagraph] track current decision point
[ListParagraph] track chosen path
[ListParagraph] restore learner position if resumed
Deployment target:
[web / both]
Technical constraints:
[ListParagraph] keep the branching logic readable and maintainable
For the first version:
[ListParagraph] prioritize coherent branching structure
[Heading2] 18.4 Simulation Prompt
Create an interactive learning simulation.
Learning goal:
[system or mechanism]
Audience:
[audience]
Content type:
Simulation.
Core interactions:
[ListParagraph] adjustable controls
[ListParagraph] clear indicators
[ListParagraph] immediate visual response
[ListParagraph] guided challenges learners can attempt
Feedback or assessment behavior:
[ListParagraph] show system response clearly
[ListParagraph] include optional guided tasks or explanatory annotations
Content or data source:
[ListParagraph] simplified model or mock parameters for the first version
Tracking and persistence requirements:
[ListParagraph] track current parameters
[ListParagraph] track challenge completion if used
[ListParagraph] restore the current simulation state if resumed
Deployment target:
[web / both]
Technical constraints:
[ListParagraph] the design should favor clarity over spectacle
For the first version:
[ListParagraph] prioritize the working system model and readable controls
[Heading2] 18.5 Mini-Game Prompt
Create a mini-game for learning practice.
Learning goal:
[skill]
Audience:
[audience]
Content type:
Mini-game.
Core interactions:
[ListParagraph] quick rounds
[ListParagraph] visible score
[ListParagraph] simple progression
[ListParagraph] replayability
Feedback or assessment behavior:
[ListParagraph] immediate gameplay feedback
[ListParagraph] end-of-round score and replay option
Content or data source:
[ListParagraph] authored game logic and prompts
Tracking and persistence requirements:
[ListParagraph] track score
[ListParagraph] track round progress if resume is needed
Deployment target:
[web / both]
Technical constraints:
[ListParagraph] keep it lightweight and compatible with browser delivery
For the first version:
[ListParagraph] prioritize a stable loop and scoring behavior
[Heading2] 18.6 Data Visualization Prompt
Create an interactive learning-oriented data visualization.
Learning goal:
[analytical or interpretive outcome]
Audience:
[audience]
Content type:
Learning-oriented data visualization.
Core interactions:
[ListParagraph] meaningful filtering
[ListParagraph] rich tooltips or detail views
[ListParagraph] a clear narrative structure
[ListParagraph] support for comparison
Feedback or assessment behavior:
[ListParagraph] explanatory annotations or summary states where appropriate
Content or data source:
[ListParagraph] structured dataset or mock dataset
Tracking and persistence requirements:
[ListParagraph] track current selection, filters, and active view
[ListParagraph] restore the current view if resumed
Deployment target:
[web / both]
Technical constraints:
[ListParagraph] the visualization should teach, not merely impress
For the first version:
[ListParagraph] prioritize clarity, inspectability, and narrative structure
[Heading2] 19. Where Three.js Fits In
Three.js is one possible tool, not the main point of the tutorial.
[Heading3] Version Pinning Rule for External Libraries
Whenever a project uses a library such as Three.js or D3, the prompt should specify the exact tested version or tested version family. Do not rely on generic wording like "use D3" or "use Three.js" if reproducibility matters, because API differences across versions can create confusing behavior changes.
For example, in the Three.js-based work that informed this tutorial, the practical reference point was Three.js r128. If you use D3, the same principle applies: pin the version you intend to test and keep that version explicit in the prompt, the implementation notes, and the dependency references. The broader rule is simple: if a library matters, version it on purpose.
Use Three.js when:
the content genuinely benefits from 3D space
a globe, scene, or spatial model improves learning
interaction with 3D objects adds instructional value
Do not use Three.js just because it looks impressive.
For many e-learning objects, plain HTML/CSS/JS is enough and often better.
Examples where Three.js might be useful:
global geographic learning visualizations
anatomical or spatial exploration
3D scientific models
immersive system diagrams
Examples where Three.js is probably unnecessary:
standard quizzes
basic branching scenarios
flashcards
text-heavy explainers
simple scoring interactions
In other words:
Three.js is an example specialization, not the tutorial's center of gravity.
[Heading2] 20. Example Specialized Track: Three.js as One Case
If you do want a Three.js-based learning object, the same generic workflow still applies.
For example:
define the learning goal
define the data or spatial model
ask for a working interaction first
review layout and performance in the browser
refine visuals only after the structure works
package for SCORM only after the interaction stabilizes
That is exactly how the PISA globe example fit into this broader method.
[Heading2] 21. Accessibility and Learning Usefulness Should Be Explicit
Do not assume Codex will automatically prioritize accessibility or instructional clarity unless you ask.
Useful prompt additions include:
Make the interface accessible and readable.
Use clear contrast, visible focus states, understandable labels, and learner-friendly language.
Keep the interaction cognitively manageable.
Avoid overly decorative effects that interfere with comprehension.
Make the feedback instructionally meaningful, not just correct/incorrect.
This matters a lot for real e-learning quality.
[Heading3] Optional Advanced Layer: Privacy and Data-Leak Awareness
One additional advanced topic from our discussions is that SCORM packages are still web apps, which means they can carry ordinary web risks. If your project becomes more production-oriented, it may be worth reviewing the package for:
unexpected external requests
hidden analytics calls
hardcoded secrets
learner identifiers embedded in state
unsafe use of query strings or stored data
This is not necessary for every prototype, but it is a useful reminder that LMS compatibility and instructional quality are not the only concerns. Packaging quality, data handling, and privacy hygiene also matter when learning content moves toward wider use.
[Heading2] 22. Versioning Strategy
A simple versioning approach can save a lot of confusion.
At minimum, keep:
one working source version
one SCORM version
one web version
If the content is becoming more complex, also keep:
an earlier stable checkpoint
a simplified demo version
a data-only reference file
The principle is simple:
Do not destroy the working version just to make the next experiment.
This principle becomes more important the moment you support both SCORM and web delivery. Even if the learner-facing experience is similar, the runtime assumptions are different. The safest habit is to preserve stable versions as soon as they work and treat later modifications as forks rather than overwrites. That makes rollback easier, testing clearer, and collaboration less error-prone.
[Heading2] 23. A Reusable Master Prompt Template
Here is a generic master template you can reuse for most e-learning content projects.
Create an interactive e-learning object.
Learning goal:
[what the learner should understand, practice, or decide]
Audience:
[who the learner is]
Content type:
[explainer / quiz / branching scenario / simulation / mini-game / data visualization]
Core interactions:
[ListParagraph] [interaction 1]
[ListParagraph] [interaction 2]
[ListParagraph] [interaction 3]
Feedback or assessment behavior:
[ListParagraph] [feedback rule 1]
[ListParagraph] [feedback rule 2]
Content or data source:
[ListParagraph] [existing authored content / mock content / dataset / scenario script / generated placeholder]
Tracking and persistence requirements:
[ListParagraph] [what should be tracked]
[ListParagraph] [what should be restorable]
Deployment target:
[SCORM / web / both]
Technical constraints:
[ListParagraph] [single HTML or multi-file]
[ListParagraph] [library restrictions]
[ListParagraph] [runtime restrictions]
[ListParagraph] [design or device constraints]
For the first version:
[ListParagraph] prioritize working structure over polish
[ListParagraph] use mock content or mock data if necessary
[ListParagraph] keep the code easy to revise
This exact structure should be reused in your planning notes and in your prompts.
That alignment is not cosmetic. It is how you reduce drift between educational intent and technical implementation.
Then use follow-up prompts for:
layout revision
content revision
tracking revision
packaging
localization
accessibility
web version fork
[Heading2] 24. A Full Example Collaboration Sequence
Below is a generic sequence that works for many projects.
[Heading3] Step 1
Create an interactive learning object.
Learning goal:
[goal]
Audience:
[audience]
Content type:
[type]
Core interactions:
[ListParagraph] [interaction 1]
[ListParagraph] [interaction 2]
Feedback or assessment behavior:
[ListParagraph] [feedback rule]
Content or data source:
[ListParagraph] [source]
Tracking and persistence requirements:
[ListParagraph] [tracking need]
Deployment target:
[web / SCORM / both]
Technical constraints:
[ListParagraph] [constraint]
For the first version:
[ListParagraph] focus on a working instructional flow, not final polish
[Heading3] Step 2
The first version works.
Now improve the learner instructions, screen hierarchy, and feedback clarity.
Keep the underlying interaction logic unchanged.
[Heading3] Step 3
The layout still feels off.
Reduce clutter, improve spacing, and make the main learner task visually dominant.
[Heading3] Step 4
Now add persistence so the learner can return to the same place later.
If this is the pre-SCORM web version, use localStorage.
[Heading3] Step 5
Now convert this into a SCORM 1.2 package.
Keep the current interaction and track the state necessary for resume.
[Heading3] Step 6
Create a separate web deployment version.
Do not overwrite the SCORM version.
Preserve the same learner-facing behavior while replacing SCORM persistence with localStorage.
This pattern works remarkably well.
[Heading2] 25. Troubleshooting Prompts
Here are some useful troubleshooting prompts.
[Heading3] If the logic is confusing
The activity works technically, but the learner flow is confusing.
Please review the sequence of instructions, transitions, and feedback so the purpose of each step is clearer.
[Heading3] If the design feels too busy
The interface feels too busy for educational use.
Please simplify the visual hierarchy, reduce decorative effects, and keep attention on the core task.
[Heading3] If persistence fails
State persistence is not working reliably.
Please review the save and restore flow so the learner returns to the same step and state.
[Heading3] If SCORM resume fails
The SCORM package launches, but the learner does not return to the correct state after re-entry.
Please review suspend_data handling and restore the current position, score, and relevant UI state.
[Heading3] If the web version should be preserved separately
Please create a separate web deployment version.
Do not overwrite the SCORM package.
Use localStorage in the web version while preserving the same user-facing behavior.
[Heading2] 26. Final Quality Checklist
Before you call the project done, check all of the following.
[Heading3] Learning Design
The learning goal is clear
The activity actually supports that goal
The learner knows what to do
The feedback is useful
The pacing makes sense
[Heading3] Interaction Design
The controls are understandable
The sequence is coherent
The learner can recover from mistakes
State behaves as expected
[Heading3] Visual Design
The main task is visually central
The layout feels balanced
The interface is readable
The style fits the educational context
[Heading3] Technical Delivery
The object loads correctly
SCORM works if applicable
web deployment works if applicable
persistence works
the stable versions are preserved separately
[Heading2] 27. Final Advice
The strongest collaboration pattern with Codex is not:
"Write everything perfectly in one shot."
It is:
"Help me build this well, one stable step at a time."
If you define the learning goal, keep the prompts structured, review the output carefully, and separate stable versions, Codex becomes a very effective partner for building e-learning content.
That is the real method.
Another way to say this is that good collaboration with Codex is not mainly about wording clever prompts. It is about preserving design logic across stages. The more faithfully you carry the learning goal, audience, interaction model, feedback model, and deployment assumptions from concept to prompt to revision to packaging, the more coherent the final result becomes. That is why this tutorial keeps returning to structure, alignment, and iteration. Those are the habits that turn code generation into courseware development.
[Heading2] 28. Short Summary of the Method
Define the learning goal, audience, content type, and deployment target.
Ask for a working first version.
Review it in the browser.
Give specific feedback about learning, layout, interaction, and tone.
Stabilize the instructional experience first.
Add SCORM or local persistence later.
Test in Moodle if needed.
Keep SCORM and web versions separate.
Reuse the same collaboration method for the next learning object.
[Heading2] Appendix A. Complete Minimal Quiz Example (`index.html`)
This appendix provides a fully written minimal example rather than only a placeholder prompt. The purpose is not to present a production-ready course, but to show what a small, readable, resumable learning object can look like before a team scales the pattern.
This example is intentionally simple:
one question at a time
immediate feedback
final score
resume-friendly state
external scormdriver.js helper
<!doctype html>
<html lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1">
<title>Minimal SCORM Quiz</title>
<style>
:root {
color-scheme: light;
--bg: #f5f7fb;
--card: #ffffff;
--border: #d8deea;
--ink: #1e2a37;
--muted: #5d6a79;
--accent: #2457c5;
--accent-soft: #eaf0ff;
--correct: #1f8a4c;
--incorrect: #b03a2e;
}
* {
box-sizing: border-box;
}
body {
margin: 0;
font-family: "Aptos", "Segoe UI", sans-serif;
background: linear-gradient(180deg, #eff3fb 0%, #f9fbff 100%);
color: var(--ink);
}
main {
max-width: 780px;
margin: 48px auto;
padding: 0 20px 40px;
}
.card {
background: var(--card);
border: 1px solid var(--border);
border-radius: 20px;
padding: 28px;
box-shadow: 0 16px 40px rgba(26, 48, 92, 0.08);
}
.eyebrow {
margin: 0 0 8px;
color: var(--accent);
font-size: 13px;
font-weight: 700;
letter-spacing: 0.08em;
text-transform: uppercase;
}
h1 {
margin: 0 0 10px;
font-size: 32px;
line-height: 1.15;
}
p {
line-height: 1.6;
}
.meta {
display: flex;
gap: 14px;
flex-wrap: wrap;
margin: 20px 0 24px;
color: var(--muted);
font-size: 14px;
}
.question {
font-size: 22px;
margin: 0 0 18px;
}
.choices {
display: grid;
gap: 12px;
margin-bottom: 18px;
}
button.choice {
width: 100%;
text-align: left;
padding: 14px 16px;
border-radius: 14px;
border: 1px solid var(--border);
background: #fff;
font: inherit;
cursor: pointer;
transition: border-color 0.18s ease, background 0.18s ease, transform 0.18s ease;
}
button.choice:hover {
border-color: #a7bbec;
background: #f7faff;
transform: translateY(-1px);
}
button.choice[disabled] {
cursor: default;
transform: none;
}
button.choice.correct {
border-color: #bde6ca;
background: #eefaf2;
}
button.choice.incorrect {
border-color: #f1c0bb;
background: #fff3f1;
}
.feedback {
min-height: 28px;
margin-bottom: 16px;
font-size: 15px;
color: var(--muted);
}
.feedback.correct {
color: var(--correct);
}
.feedback.incorrect {
color: var(--incorrect);
}
.actions {
display: flex;
gap: 12px;
flex-wrap: wrap;
margin-top: 18px;
}
.primary,
.secondary {
padding: 12px 18px;
border-radius: 12px;
font: inherit;
font-weight: 600;
cursor: pointer;
}
.primary {
border: 1px solid var(--accent);
background: var(--accent);
color: #fff;
}
.secondary {
border: 1px solid var(--border);
background: var(--accent-soft);
color: var(--accent);
}
.summary-box {
border: 1px solid var(--border);
background: #fbfcff;
border-radius: 16px;
padding: 18px;
margin: 18px 0;
}
</style>
</head>
<body>
<main>
<section class="card" aria-live="polite">
<p class="eyebrow">Minimal Example</p>
<h1>SCORM Quiz Starter</h1>
<p>This is a small reference quiz that demonstrates one-question-at-a-time flow, immediate feedback, score reporting, and resume-friendly state handling.</p>
<div id="app"></div>
</section>
</main>
<script src="scormdriver.js"></script>
<script>
const questions = [
{
prompt: "Which planet is known as the Red Planet?",
choices: ["Mars", "Venus", "Mercury", "Jupiter"],
correctIndex: 0,
explanation: "Mars is known as the Red Planet because iron oxide on its surface gives it a reddish appearance."
},
{
prompt: "What does a bar chart help learners do most directly?",
choices: ["Compare categories", "Read a narrative", "Simulate motion", "Store browser cookies"],
correctIndex: 0,
explanation: "Bar charts are especially useful when learners need to compare categories or groups quickly."
},
{
prompt: "In a SCORM activity, what is suspend_data mainly used for?",
choices: ["To store learner progress state", "To host image files", "To replace the manifest", "To render CSS"],
correctIndex: 0,
explanation: "suspend_data is commonly used to store the learner's resumable state between launches."
}
];
const passingScore = 70;
const state = {
currentIndex: 0,
selectedChoice: null,
answers: [],
score: 0,
completed: false
};
const app = document.getElementById("app");
const scorm = window.scorm12;
function init() {
scorm.init();
scorm.setStatus("incomplete");
restoreState();
render();
}
function restoreState() {
const raw = scorm.getSuspendData();
if (!raw) {
return;
}
try {
const saved = JSON.parse(raw);
state.currentIndex = saved.currentIndex ?? 0;
state.answers = Array.isArray(saved.answers) ? saved.answers : [];
state.score = Number(saved.score ?? 0);
state.completed = Boolean(saved.completed);
} catch (error) {
console.warn("Could not parse suspend_data", error);
}
}
function persistState() {
const payload = JSON.stringify({
currentIndex: state.currentIndex,
answers: state.answers,
score: state.score,
completed: state.completed
});
scorm.setSuspendData(payload);
scorm.setLocation(state.completed ? "summary" : String(state.currentIndex));
scorm.commit();
}
function getQuestionStatus(questionIndex) {
return state.answers.find((entry) => entry.questionIndex === questionIndex) || null;
}
function answerQuestion(choiceIndex) {
const question = questions[state.currentIndex];
const existing = getQuestionStatus(state.currentIndex);
if (existing) {
return;
}
const isCorrect = choiceIndex === question.correctIndex;
state.answers.push({
questionIndex: state.currentIndex,
choiceIndex,
isCorrect
});
if (isCorrect) {
state.score += Math.round(100 / questions.length);
}
persistState();
render();
}
function moveNext() {
if (state.currentIndex < questions.length - 1) {
state.currentIndex += 1;
persistState();
render();
return;
}
finishQuiz();
}
function finishQuiz() {
state.completed = true;
const finalScore = Math.min(state.score, 100);
scorm.setScore(finalScore, 0, 100);
scorm.setStatus(finalScore >= passingScore ? "passed" : "failed");
scorm.setExit("suspend");
persistState();
render();
}
function restartQuiz() {
state.currentIndex = 0;
state.answers = [];
state.score = 0;
state.completed = false;
scorm.setStatus("incomplete");
persistState();
render();
}
function render() {
if (state.completed) {
renderSummary();
return;
}
const question = questions[state.currentIndex];
const answered = getQuestionStatus(state.currentIndex);
const progressLabel = Question ${state.currentIndex + 1} of ${questions.length};
app.innerHTML = `
<div class="meta">
<span>${progressLabel}</span>
<span>Score: ${state.score}</span>
<span>Passing score: ${passingScore}</span>
</div>
<h2 class="question">${question.prompt}</h2>
<div class="choices"></div>
<div id="feedback" class="feedback"></div>
<div class="actions">
<button id="nextButton" class="primary" ${answered ? "" : "disabled"}>${state.currentIndex === questions.length - 1 ? "Finish" : "Next question"}</button>
</div>
`;
const choicesContainer = app.querySelector(".choices");
question.choices.forEach((choice, index) => {
const button = document.createElement("button");
button.type = "button";
button.className = "choice";
button.textContent = choice;
button.disabled = Boolean(answered);
button.addEventListener("click", () => answerQuestion(index));
if (answered) {
if (index === question.correctIndex) {
button.classList.add("correct");
} else if (index === answered.choiceIndex) {
button.classList.add("incorrect");
}
}
choicesContainer.appendChild(button);
});
const feedback = document.getElementById("feedback");
if (answered) {
feedback.className = feedback ${answered.isCorrect ? "correct" : "incorrect"};
feedback.textContent = ${answered.isCorrect ? "Correct." : "Not quite."} ${question.explanation};
}
document.getElementById("nextButton").addEventListener("click", moveNext);
}
function renderSummary() {
const finalScore = Math.min(state.score, 100);
const outcome = finalScore >= passingScore ? "passed" : "not yet passed";
app.innerHTML = `
<div class="summary-box">
<h2>Quiz complete</h2>
<p>You scored <strong>${finalScore}</strong> out of 100 and ${outcome} this activity.</p>
<p>Your answers were stored through SCORM state, so this summary can be restored on re-entry.</p>
</div>
<div class="actions">
<button id="restartButton" class="secondary" type="button">Restart quiz</button>
</div>
`;
document.getElementById("restartButton").addEventListener("click", restartQuiz);
}
window.addEventListener("beforeunload", () => {
if (!state.completed) {
scorm.setExit("suspend");
persistState();
}
scorm.finish();
});
init();
</script>
</body>
</html>
[Heading2] Appendix B. Minimal `scormdriver.js` Example
This appendix provides a minimal local helper rather than referring vaguely to a wrapper file that the reader cannot inspect. It is intentionally small and should be treated as a starter reference, not as a complete compatibility layer for every SCORM environment.
(function () {
function findApi(win) {
var maxTries = 20;
var current = win;
var tries = 0;
while (current && tries < maxTries) {
if (current.API) {
return current.API;
}
tries += 1;
if (current.parent && current.parent !== current) {
current = current.parent;
} else {
break;
}
}
current = win.opener;
tries = 0;
while (current && tries < maxTries) {
if (current.API) {
return current.API;
}
tries += 1;
if (current.parent && current.parent !== current) {
current = current.parent;
} else {
break;
}
}
return null;
}
function createDriver() {
var api = null;
var initialized = false;
function safeCall(fn, fallback) {
try {
return fn();
} catch (error) {
console.warn("SCORM call failed", error);
return fallback;
}
}
return {
init: function () {
if (initialized) {
return true;
}
api = findApi(window);
if (!api) {
console.warn("No SCORM 1.2 API found. Running in browser-only mode.");
return false;
}
initialized = safeCall(function () {
return api.LMSInitialize("") === "true";
}, false);
return initialized;
},
finish: function () {
if (!api || !initialized) {
return false;
}
return safeCall(function () {
return api.LMSFinish("") === "true";
}, false);
},
get: function (element) {
if (!api || !initialized) {
return "";
}
return safeCall(function () {
return api.LMSGetValue(element) || "";
}, "");
},
set: function (element, value) {
if (!api || !initialized) {
return false;
}
return safeCall(function () {
return api.LMSSetValue(element, String(value)) === "true";
}, false);
},
commit: function () {
if (!api || !initialized) {
return false;
}
return safeCall(function () {
return api.LMSCommit("") === "true";
}, false);
},
setStatus: function (status) {
return this.set("cmi.core.lesson_status", status);
},
setScore: function (raw, min, max) {
this.set("cmi.core.score.raw", raw);
this.set("cmi.core.score.min", min);
this.set("cmi.core.score.max", max);
},
setLocation: function (location) {
return this.set("cmi.core.lesson_location", location);
},
setSuspendData: function (value) {
return this.set("cmi.suspend_data", value);
},
getSuspendData: function () {
return this.get("cmi.suspend_data");
},
setExit: function (value) {
return this.set("cmi.core.exit", value);
}
};
}
window.scorm12 = createDriver();
})();
[Heading2] Appendix C. Minimal `imsmanifest.xml` Example
This appendix provides a small SCORM 1.2 manifest that matches the minimal quiz example above.
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<manifest identifier="minimal-scorm-quiz"
version="1.0"
xmlns="http://www.imsproject.org/xsd/imscp_rootv1p1p2"
xmlns:adlcp="http://www.adlnet.org/xsd/adlcp_rootv1p2"
xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
xsi:schemaLocation="http://www.imsproject.org/xsd/imscp_rootv1p1p2 imscp_rootv1p1p2.xsd
http://www.adlnet.org/xsd/adlcp_rootv1p2 adlcp_rootv1p2.xsd">
<metadata>
<schema>ADL SCORM</schema>
<schemaversion>1.2</schemaversion>
</metadata>
<organizations default="quiz-org">
<organization identifier="quiz-org">
<title>Minimal SCORM Quiz</title>
<item identifier="quiz-item" identifierref="quiz-resource">
<title>Minimal SCORM Quiz</title>
</item>
</organization>
</organizations>
<resources>
<resource identifier="quiz-resource"
type="webcontent"
adlcp:scormtype="sco"
href="index.html">
<file href="index.html" />
<file href="scormdriver.js" />
</resource>
</resources>
</manifest>
[Heading2] Appendix D. Companion Files and Prompt-Schema Cheat Sheet
This tutorial now has companion example files in:
examples/minimal-scorm-quiz/
That folder includes:
index.html
scormdriver.js
imsmanifest.xml
The tutorial also includes a separate one-page prompt schema cheat sheet so that Section 5.11 can be used independently rather than only as part of the larger document.
[Heading2] Appendix E. Operational Prompt Library for Working with Codex
The earlier sections of this tutorial explain the prompt structure conceptually. This appendix is more operational. It is for the moment when you are already inside a Codex conversation and need practical language for building, revising, packaging, and checking a learning object.
The prompts below are intentionally written in a direct working style. They can be adapted project by project, but the important thing is that they tell Codex:
what task to do
what to preserve
what to verify
what to report back
[Heading3] E.1 First Build Prompt
Create the first working version of this e-learning object.
Learning goal:
[goal]
Audience:
[audience]
Content type:
[type]
Core interactions:
[ListParagraph] [interaction 1]
[ListParagraph] [interaction 2]
Feedback or assessment behavior:
[ListParagraph] [feedback rule]
Content or data source:
[ListParagraph] [source]
Tracking and persistence requirements:
[ListParagraph] [what should be tracked or restored]
Deployment target:
[web / SCORM / both]
Technical constraints:
[ListParagraph] [constraints]
For the first version:
[ListParagraph] prioritize a working instructional structure over polish
[ListParagraph] use placeholder content if needed
[ListParagraph] keep the code easy to revise
[Heading3] E.2 Revision Prompt with Scope Control
Revise the current learning object.
Change:
[ListParagraph] [what should change]
Preserve:
[ListParagraph] [what should stay stable]
Reason:
[ListParagraph] [why this change matters instructionally or technically]
After making the revision, summarize:
1. what changed
2. what was intentionally preserved
3. any risk or limitation that remains
[Heading3] E.3 Prompt for Explicit Assumptions
Please do the requested work directly, but make your assumptions explicit at the end.
If you have to infer anything about the learning goal, audience, state model, or packaging target, list those assumptions clearly.
This is useful when the task is concrete but the brief is not perfectly complete.
[Heading3] E.4 SCORM Zip Structure Audit Prompt
This is the most directly relevant prompt for checking whether a generated SCORM zip is actually organized correctly.
Inspect this SCORM zip package and verify whether it is correctly structured for SCORM 1.2 and Moodle 4.3+ upload.
Please check:
[ListParagraph] whether imsmanifest.xml exists at the package root
[ListParagraph] whether the manifest declares SCORM 1.2 correctly
[ListParagraph] whether the launch file referenced in the manifest actually exists
[ListParagraph] whether required files are present inside the zip
[ListParagraph] whether the package appears to be a single-SCO or multi-SCO structure
[ListParagraph] whether the internal file paths match the manifest references
[ListParagraph] whether there are obvious packaging mistakes that would break LMS import or launch
Do not rewrite the package yet.
First report:
1. findings
2. risks
3. exact files or manifest lines that look wrong
4. whether the package is likely Moodle-ready as-is
[Heading3] E.5 SCORM Manifest Audit Prompt
Review the imsmanifest.xml in this package.
I want you to verify:
[ListParagraph] SCORM version assumptions
[ListParagraph] schema and schemaversion entries
[ListParagraph] organization and item structure
[ListParagraph] resource declarations
[ListParagraph] launch href correctness
[ListParagraph] whether the manifest matches the actual files in the package
Please explain your findings in plain language, not only XML terms.
[Heading3] E.6 SCORM Runtime State Audit Prompt
Review this SCORM activity for resume and runtime-state readiness.
Please check:
[ListParagraph] what learner state is currently saved
[ListParagraph] whether suspend_data is actually used
[ListParagraph] whether lesson_location is used meaningfully
[ListParagraph] whether score and lesson_status are updated coherently
[ListParagraph] whether exit is set in a sensible way
[ListParagraph] whether the object is likely to restore the learner to the correct place on re-entry
Report:
1. what is currently tracked
2. what is missing
3. what is fragile
4. what should be fixed before LMS testing
[Heading3] E.7 Moodle Readiness Prompt
I want a Moodle-readiness review for this SCORM package.
Assume Moodle 4.3+ as the target.
Please evaluate:
[ListParagraph] import readiness
[ListParagraph] launch readiness
[ListParagraph] visibility of learner instructions inside the LMS frame
[ListParagraph] likelihood of resume working
[ListParagraph] score/completion readiness
[ListParagraph] whether any setting assumptions should be called out for the Moodle activity configuration
Do not only say "it looks fine."
Give a practical launch-risk assessment.
[Heading3] E.8 Fix-After-Review Prompt
Based on the issues you found in the SCORM review, please fix the package.
Important:
[ListParagraph] preserve the current learner-facing interaction
[ListParagraph] only change packaging, manifest, runtime-state handling, or missing-file issues
[ListParagraph] keep the package as SCORM 1.2 unless you explain why a change is necessary
After fixing it, summarize:
1. what you changed
2. why those changes matter
3. what I should test first in Moodle
[Heading3] E.9 Web Fork Prompt from an Existing SCORM Package
Create a separate browser-deployable web version from this SCORM package.
Important:
[ListParagraph] do not overwrite the SCORM version
[ListParagraph] preserve the learner-facing interaction
[ListParagraph] replace SCORM persistence with localStorage or another browser-side mechanism
[ListParagraph] keep the code easy to compare against the SCORM version
Afterward, explain what changed at the runtime layer and what did not change at the interaction layer.
[Heading3] E.10 Maintainability Review Prompt
Review this learning object from a maintainability perspective.
Please assess:
[ListParagraph] file organization
[ListParagraph] readability of the interaction logic
[ListParagraph] ease of changing content later
[ListParagraph] ease of changing scoring or branching later
[ListParagraph] whether the structure is friendly to Git-based version control
[ListParagraph] what would become painful if this object grows
Then suggest:
1. the biggest maintainability risk
2. the most useful refactor
3. how this workflow compares to a proprietary authoring-file workflow
[Heading2] Appendix F. Conversation Patterns That Work Best with Codex
Good outcomes are not only about which prompt you use. They are also about how you conduct the conversation over time.
[Heading3] F.1 One Meaningful Task Per Turn
Codex usually performs better when each message has one dominant job.
Good:
Build the first working version.
Then later:
Now fix the layout without changing the activity logic.
Then later:
Now package this for SCORM 1.2 and review the resume behavior.
Less effective:
Build the activity, package it, compare it to Articulate, make it beautiful, and prepare research notes.
[Heading3] F.2 Always Name What Must Stay Stable
The fastest way to create accidental regressions is to ask for a revision without saying what must remain unchanged.
A stronger conversation pattern is:
Change:
[ListParagraph] the layout
Preserve:
[ListParagraph] the scoring logic
[ListParagraph] the question flow
[ListParagraph] the current tracking model
[Heading3] F.3 Ask for Verification, Not Only Implementation
If you care about packaging quality, do not ask only for file creation. Ask for inspection and explanation.
A strong pattern is:
Please inspect the package first and report risks before editing anything.
That is especially important for SCORM manifests, zip structure, resume logic, and LMS-readiness questions.
[Heading3] F.4 Ask for Findings in Practical Language
Beginners often get stuck when the response is technically correct but too compressed.
A better instruction is:
Explain your findings in plain language and tell me what I should test first.
This produces a much more usable review.
[Heading3] F.5 Separate Design Feedback from Runtime Feedback
This distinction matters a lot in e-learning workflows.
Examples of design feedback:
the instructions are unclear
the interface is too busy
the learner does not know what success looks like
Examples of runtime feedback:
suspend_data is not restoring correctly
the manifest path is wrong
the zip imports but does not launch
the package works on the web but not in Moodle
If those categories get mixed together, the next revision often becomes less focused.
[Heading3] F.6 A Strong Minimal Dialogue Pattern
One reliable pattern is:
ask Codex to build
inspect the result in the browser or LMS
report concrete problems
ask Codex to preserve stable parts
ask Codex to verify before finalizing
In practice, a concise but strong message often looks like this:
The activity works, but I need a stricter SCORM QA pass now.
Please inspect the package for:
[ListParagraph] manifest correctness
[ListParagraph] root-level zip structure
[ListParagraph] launch-file consistency
[ListParagraph] resume-state handling
Do not edit yet.
First report findings, risks, and what you would fix before Moodle upload.
That style of conversation tends to produce much better results than vague requests such as "Can you check if this is okay?"
Page Right-click to update field.
